hello good afternoon and welcome to the
daily Downing Street press briefing I'd
like to start with a daily update on the
latest data on coronavirus you'll see
slides coming up now so the first slide
shows cases confirmed with a test so
seven million 120 1976 test the
coronavirus have now been carried out or
posted out in the UK and that includes
one hundred and forty thousand three
hundred and fifty nine tests carried out
or posted yesterday two hundred and
ninety nine thousand two hundred and
fifty-one people have tested positive
and that is an increase of 1115 cases
since yesterday may we have the second
slide please so the second slide shows
the latest data from hospitals so three
hundred and eighty seven people were
admitted to hospital with coronavirus in
England Wales and Northern Ireland on
the 14th of June that is down from
around four hundred and thirty five a
week earlier and down from a peak of
3432 on the first of April
three hundred and seventy nine
coronavirus patients are currently in
mechanical ventilation beds in the
United Kingdom and that is down from 490
for a week ago and that in turn is down
from a peak of 3301 on the 12th of April
and May we have the third slide please
so as you'll see from the third slide
this shows what's happening in hospitals
across the country there are now five
thousand three hundred and eight people
in hospital with coronavirus in the UK
that is down 13% from six thousand one
hundred and twenty three a week ago and
again in turn that is down from a peak
of twenty thousand six hundred and
ninety-eight on the 12th of April and as
you'll see from the graphs while there
is some variation most nations and
regions in the UK are broadly following
a similar pattern now the fourth and
final slide we may have that
please that shows the daily figures for
those who have sadly lost their lives
after testing positive for coronavirus
across all settings the total number of
deaths now stands at 42 thousand 153
that sadly an increase of 184 fatalities
since yesterday now when you measure
that on a seven-day rolling average the
daily number of deaths now stands at 146
so that is down from a peak of 943 on
the 14th of April so as you'll see from
all of those four slides we are making
important progress and today actually
marks another important milestone in
just under one hours time the best
league in the world will be back up and
running after a hundred day pause all
but five countries will be airing
tonight's games underlining football's
global reach and the soft power of UK
sport the Premier League is returning
and the world will be watching and of
course it will be a very different event
to what we're used to but there's no
doubt that this is a hugely symbolic
moment an important step forward in our
careful journey back towards normality
players back in their place of work and
a boost for our football loving nation
and we've worked really hard with
football authorities police and medical
experts to get to this point but we do
need fans to play their part too so
please look after your fellow fans and
your communities by watching from home
to keep the home advantage support from
home now all 92 remaining Premier
League's will be shown playing Premier
League games we've shown live on TV and
I'm delighted that I and others managed
to work hard to get a third of them on
free-to-air channels Friday will be the
first free to air with Norwich V
Southampton then an important day on
Saturday that will be when we've had the
first ever Premier League game on the
BBC followed by the Merseyside derby
again free-to-air on Sunday and they'll
be extended highlights of all the games
free to air so you won't have to miss a
single goal our sports men and women
have set some incredible examples during
this pandemic using their profiles to
support worthwhile causes across the
United Kingdom
England's men and women cricket teams
have donated half a million pounds
towards charitable causes rugby league's
Cheshire Bank West Bank bears have
delivered food and parcels to the
elderly and of course the England and
Manchester United Football and Marcus
Radford has made the front and the back
pages for the very best of reasons
highlighting the struggles facing many
families during this difficult time but
that is of course in addition to the
fantastic work is being doing helping to
feed millions of children through the
fair share charity and the last three
months really have demonstrated that
immense power of support sport it brings
us together through kindness and common
humanity and actually I was struck by
this last week when I teamed up with His
Royal Highness the Duke of Cambridge and
some of Britain's biggest sports stars
on mental health awareness we chatted
about the need to deliver generational
change in perceptions and develop tools
for good mental health where there are a
sports star at the top of your game or a
junior just starting out or a fan going
through a difficult period and as we get
sport back I really think this is a
great opportunity for all of us to be
much more open about talking about
mental health and the sports recovery
was never though just about elite sports
I know that countless people are itching
to get back to their gyms their leisure
centres their five-a-side leagues and
all the other normal fitness activities
so we're working closely with the sector
to get grassroots and community sport
back up and running as soon as it is
safe to do so with an aim of the start
of July at the very earliest and as we
continue our efforts to get children
back to school I want to focus on the
role that sport can play in improving
young people's physical and indeed their
mental health so today is an important
moment in our recovery the return of
elite sport has provided a model to
follow one which is based on close
partnership
working with government sport and the
medics to bring it back safely but it's
a model that we're also applying to
other much loved and much missed parts
of our economy in particular the
performing arts now I know they face
enormous challenges particularly given
the impact of social distancing on life
venues and I really am looking at hard
at how we can address those challenges
over the past few weeks and months I've
been talking extensively and intensively
with people from across the UK's
cultural sector to try and find a way
through these issues from some of our
most creative directors and producers to
those running our greatest museums
theatres and music venues and an
important part of all of this is to get
performances back up and running again
now we've made a lot of progress through
the cultural renewal task force and
indeed the entertainment and events
working group which sits within that
however it is clear from all of this
that we do need greater flexibility to
overcome some of the very specific and
practical obstacles to the return of
life performance so that's why over the
next week we will be convening experts
in a targeted way bringing together our
leading performers in theatres choirs
and orchestras with medical experts and
advisors and the idea is that they will
work together in detail to develop that
roadmap which is so badly needed to
performing safely with a particular
focus on piloting innovative ideas that
may permit live performances I know how
essential our theatres our music venues
and the performing arts are to our wider
cultural ecosystem culture is our
calling card
it's respected around the world and I am
determined to work with them and across
government to support it and to preserve
its world-leading position today's
return of life football represents a
significant milestone but I hope it's
just another step towards normality to
be followed by many more in the months
to come thank you so with that I'm now
going to turn to the first two questions
both of which we are going to see on
this screen and then I will respond to
them so the first comes
from Laura in Eastbourne and she asks
theaters around the country still remain
closed with no reopening date in sight
how do you expect employers to keep
their staff employed and to contribute
to the job retention scheme you're
unable to open and have a zero income
well Laura I hope I addressed some of
that in my opening remarks the first
thing that we've done to support
theaters is the job retention scheme
without the job retention scheme
literally thousands of people in
theaters would have lost their jobs
already because of the job retention
scheme the government has spent tens of
millions of pounds ensuring that those
people can keep their jobs we've also
introduced schemes like for example
deferral of v80 payments and business
rate deferrals and indeed business rate
relief of course I know that for
theaters in particular as we open and
we've set the challenging target of the
4th of July is going to be exceptionally
difficult for theaters to open
consistent with social distancing and
that is why I continue to have
discussions across government to see
what further support we can give
theaters during this challenging time so
hopefully that answers the first
question we are now going to go on to
the second question and this is from Val
from Weatherby she asks what is the
policy and strategy to allow visitors to
relatives in care home whose mental
health has been severely impacted by
lock down whilst at the same time
protecting vulnerable residents so first
of all I know Val and I don't know
whether you have got family in care
homes I know what a terribly difficult
time this has been for people who have
families in care homes not being able to
see them in person
and the government really is aware of
this challenge I think it was essential
that we protected people in care homes
by not allowing that visiting to happen
of course I know that is something that
my colleague the health secretary is
continuing to work through and as soon
as it is safe to do so
we will ensure that that can
but now I really do understand your your
desire to be able to do so so those are
the two questions that we've had from
the public we're now going to turn to
hugh pim from the BBC Hugh are you there
yes thank you very much indeed a couple
of questions if I may first of all more
than 1,500 pediatricians have written to
the Prime Minister saying they are very
concerned that many pupils are not back
in schools and are calling urgently for
a plan to get them back what's your
response to that and secondly there were
some ministers at the beginning of the
crisis who were rather critical of
professional footballers leading
footballers for not taking pay cuts has
that view changed and you know praising
them and the games authorities for
getting back from today and providing
entertainment to fans well two very
different questions there who I'll try
to address each one of them first of all
on the plan to get schools back it's
vitally important that we get children
back to school I know my own daughter is
back at her local state school and
millions of well has hundreds of
thousands of kids over 600,000 kids
across the country are back at school
we've managed to get back children in
reception and year one and indeed in a
year six of course we want to go further
and that's why from September we want to
ensure that all schools are back I do
think it's important know as part of
this that we really reassure parents
that it's safe for their kids to go back
and I've been really heartened by the
incredible hard work that I've seen from
teachers up and down the country who've
worked so hard in difficult
circumstances to get kids back to school
I do think it's a bit of a shame that
their unions and indeed it appears the
leader of the Labour Party is not also
providing them with that kind of backing
and support in relation to professional
footballers I think it's wonderful that
we've got football back and we've worked
really hard with the professional
footballers and others on this and then
particularly I pay a tribute to Jonathan
Antin
professor jonathan bantam who's done an
awful lot to reassure footballers about
the the safety of all of this and I
think it's entirely right that we should
praise footballers for for the role that
they're playing in ensuring that we're
able to get back to normal life as
before I think that the comments you're
referring to were in relation to the
access to the job retention scheme on
the job retention scheme I've I've
always been clear and I think most of
the clubs have followed this you should
only access the job retention scheme if
you can't fought to to use other means
and I think they followed that example
do you have any follow-ups there Hugh
yes on football once again do you have
any concerns about fans gathering at
grounds and you have any message to them
and secondly what about lower leagues
and the financial plight of many clubs
what support or assistance can you give
there well those are two important
points festival and I hope viewers at
home would have heard this message at
the beginning of this it is so important
the risk here would be if people
congregate outside stadiums it is really
important to stay at home that is an
important part of saving lives in this
period we do not want people to
inadvertently spread the coronavirus by
being outside stadiums but I must say
that the British people and I think fans
have shown remarkable good and common
sense they know that this they shouldn't
be doing this now I really don't think
they will an important part of this has
been negotiating those free-to-air
matches which will give people the
opportunity to watch a large number of
those matches live at home if they don't
have subscriptions and indeed to see
extended highlights for the rest that
they don't have subscriptions the second
point forgive me he what was the second
point that you raised about lower league
yes solo elite clubs I think throughout
all of this I think the best thing we
can do for football is to get it up and
running again so of course by getting
the Premiership in the champion of
Premier League and the tram pionship
back up and running that is releasing
funds that would otherwise have been
forgotten those those clubs would have
had to have made a penalty pain
to the broadcaster so that gets more
money into the sport and of course that
can then be shared through the the
football pyramid I hope and actually the
next stage in reopening so we've had
three stages in reopening the first
stage was socially distant training the
second was contact training the third
has been the return of life support
behind closed doors the fourth stage
will be international competition and
the fifth stage will then be about
seeing whether it's safe for fans to
return to stadiums just today we've had
very productive discussions about this I
would really hope that by the return of
the the new season we might be in a
position whereby some fans could start
to return to stadiums and I know that
would be another important part of
restoring the financial position of
clubs thanks for those questions are now
over to Robert Peston from ITV Secretary
of State can you tell us whether there
is any chance that within a year we will
be back in stadiums in theatres in
entertainment venues and if you can't
what can you do to stop the hundreds of
thousands of job losses that look set to
come within weeks long before the Kerr
the corona virus job retention scheme
ends in October as Cameron mcintoshes
announcement of redundancies today shows
all too clearly
well thank you for those questions
Robert I should also give you a
follow-up to a question you asked me
when I was on your show last week I'm
pleased to say that royal parks are
starting to open their their lose every
royal parking has got one at least one
loo open and more will be opening and in
the in relation to the other points you
raised that I I really want and I
understand the need for all of these
venues to return with people in them and
indeed eventually without social
distancing but that can only be done if
the public health allows it to happen
and I think they will see different
scenarios I think in relation to stadium
where where people are outside and
they're much bigger and there's more
scope for social distancing it may well
be that you could do that sooner I know
particularly with the performing
and theatres when you're doing that in a
confined space there are greater risks
there this is why we've given it a lot
of attention we have the first step is
that we have extended the job retention
scheme through to the end of October
but of course I'm continuing to work
with everyone across industry to look at
what further support we can give them
indeed across government and you
mentioned Cameron Mackintosh Cameron
Mackintosh is just one of dozens of
people that I've spoken to on a
one-to-one basis so I'm very familiar
with the challenges that are being faced
and we're working to resolve them any
follow-ups it's not a completely
unrelated note many of us have seen the
picture of the security car bashing into
the Prime Minister's car this afternoon
with the protester running out are there
security implications of all of that
that you need to look into well I don't
I don't know about the security
implications I don't believe that there
are I can updates and I've just been
updated prior to this press conference
I'm happy to say that the Prime Minister
is wholly unscathed and I believe that
everyone else escaped safely from that
that situation so thanks for that
question now on to Hugh Roos and crafts
from talk sport hi Hugh thank you very
much you've joined the Premier League
urging fans to stay at home to watch and
listen to Premier League matches but
specific advice have you given the
police if fans do turn up outside stadia
and what is the threshold for moving
matches to neutral venues if there are
any issues and secondly our listeners
that at thoughtbot would love to see
Marcus rest for the Manchester United
formerly recognized some of the work
that he's been doing hoping to provide
free school meal vouchers during the
school holiday so what do you think is
it a ricer Marcus well on your your
first question though it's an important
point naturally just before this press
conference I was speaking to the the
policing minister about this and clearly
we have been working across the policing
authorities we've worked very closely in
developing all of these plans and we've
been very clear from the beginning that
if this is
one of the the risks of course police
have appropriate powers and they will be
able to use them as necessary but I
really hope that this situation won't
arise in the first place and I really do
trust the good sense of football fans up
and down the country and indeed the the
British public to know that you can
watch this safely at home there's
nothing to be gained from congregating
outside a stadium the only thing that
could happen if you congregated out
outside a stadium is to put at risk
public health on on Marcus Radford yes
I've been very impressed
it is his lobbying skills sadly it's not
within my my purview to to award
knighthoods or or anything else but
we'll see what happens on that front and
any follow-ups yes just on a return of
what are the specific requirements that
need to be met before you allow fans
back into stadiums and tonight in the
Premier League for the first round of
matches thank you and NHS and also black
lives matter will be upon the shirt of
Premier League players well first of all
on the steps to return fans to the
stadiums it will be a similar process to
what we've gone through with the return
of a live sport behind closed doors so
we are having intensive engagement to
look at how that could be done safely
clearly we will not only look at the
positioning of fans and where they are
relative to each other but there's all
the issues about how you get in and out
of stadiums in a safe way how you have
access to conveniences and and
everything else and I want to be clear
on this we are having these discussions
I'm not at this stage indicating that
this is going to happen but of course
that it is the the final step in the
five stage process in respect of what
Premier League players have got on their
their shirts look it's I think it's up
to everyone how they wish to mark black
lives matter indeed the NHS they've
they've taken that that decision and
that's great for them to market in the
way that they want to my focus clears
and Minister is about creating
opportunities so for example I was
really pleased last week to announce
in relation to artificial intelligence
which was another bit of my my brief
we're creating conversion course there
and we've reserved a thousand places on
that conversion course for people who
don't typically access it so my focus is
on creating those opportunities so
thanks very much for those questions now
we are on to Gordon Raina for The Daily
Telegraph good afternoon I'm Secretary
of State thank you on the subject of
theatres in cinemas
Sir Patrick balance was talking
yesterday about the idea that the
2-meter rule was but was not set in
stone it could be flexible perhaps he
talked about people sitting side by side
people wearing face masks people being
in ventilated areas I just wanted it
there some of the things that you've
been talking to theaters and cinemas
about and if perhaps you're thinking of
opening them up with by using face masks
or other means
they obviously rely hugely on large
numbers of people being crammed in
side-by-side is that one of the things
that you're perhaps looking at to get
theaters and cinemas reopened and just a
small point Curtis asked us culture
secretary how it made you feel seeing
some of our most loved public monuments
like the statue of Churchill and ordered
up over the last few days thanks for
those questions so the first one I think
there's actually two or maybe even three
parts to it so the on the 2 meter /
versus 1 meter we've got this review
ongoing and we will look at it in the
way that you described now that even
that it's clear and if it was trending
on on public health if we were in the
situation where we got down to one meter
I think that would be of more benefit to
cinemas because I think they are better
able to operate at lower capacities it
will still be immensely challenging for
theaters theaters as you say really do
rely not just in terms of the atmosphere
but the profit margins they work on
wafer-thin profit margins they need lots
of people packed in I have been in touch
with Andrew Lloyd Webber and others
about for example what they've done in
in Seoul in relation to one of his
productions and we are we are looking at
and that's why I as I announced at the
beginning of this press conference we're
creating a specific group to challenge
all those kind of things but I do have
to say that that that it is going to be
very challenging to be able to do that I
think that that in itself will not be
enough to overcome the wider challenges
around social distancing that that's to
say that social distancing plays a very
important part in reducing the the
spread of the disease so I think we may
be looking at some time for theatres to
be returning to a state of where they
can perform extensively which is why
I've been discussing what other support
we can provide them with in relation to
statues
I think statues have huge symbolic value
particularly the Cenotaph so I was in
touch with English Heritage on on Monday
and I'm glad English heritage have
removed the hoarding around the Cenotaph
and my office has been in touch with the
mayor's office around the Churchill
statue the Churchill statue is under his
purview because it sits within the the
GLA and I'm hopeful that the mayor will
will remove that I think it's
particularly important that this should
happen given that president Mac Rome
will be visiting shortly - to mark that
famous address from de Gaulle what a
virtual covered up at that point would
would not be a great look but I think
the mayor appreciates that
thanks any other follow-ups there Gordon
well I just just felt I ought to ask you
about the admission biodynamic street
today that the Prime Minister's spending
nearly a million pounds having is
Voyager aircraft repainted to have a
Union Flag colour scheme on it is that
honestly the best use of taxpayers money
do you think no actually I think that
what we have always spent money on
promoting the UK around the world if you
look at the the great campaign and I see
this with creative industries and
creative industries we've genuinely are
a creative industries superpower and we
we should be promoting that and we've
done that through the the great campaign
and I think that the the work on Voyager
is part of that that promotion so thanks
for those questions and now over to Seb
pain at the FT thank you very much mr.
Dowd
one of these press conferences a month
ago you said that you hoped the British
tourism industry would be up and running
again by the beginning of July if that's
the leo intention when will you tell Pew
about when they can go on holiday with
in the UK because most folks need a bit
more than two weeks notice and it was
good to hear a news earlier mr. Dowd and
about toilets within the Royal Parks but
I was wondering what else this
government is doing to help open more
public toilets you've urged people to go
back to shops and have said people can
socialize outside without those toilets
open it risks turning our parks and
streets into cesspits thank you
well thanks both those questions yes as
I announced at this press conference and
announced that this press conference I
confirm what the Prime Minister had said
at this press conference a month ago
we've set out a road map and you saw the
latest stage on delivering on that
roadmap at the beginning of this week
with the opening of non-essential retail
the next stage in this roadmap is the
fourth of July I very much hope that
we'll be able to stick to that roadmap
and we will see tourism return to the UK
I'm a huge fan of British holidays I've
holidayed from everywhere from the Lake
District and Northumbria to Devon
Cornwall Dorset Norfolk all these
wonderful places and I want to be out
there making the case for people to to
do that but of course we can only do so
when it is is safe to do so so we will
publish the the guidance in due course
we've made a lot of progress with it but
the key thing is having the ensuring
that it's safe to do so on toilets I
should emphasize the toilets didn't
actually fall within my ministerial
portfolios side from the royal royal
parts which is a one of d CMS's
arms-length bodies but I know that
Secretary of State for MHC LG has set
very clear guidance for local
authorities that they should be opening
those those toilets and I very much
agree with that and any other follow-up
sir yes thank you mr. Dowd Anam earlier
a couple of weeks ago this government
said we shouldn't expect to have any
summer holidays abroad but now there's
been reports that the government is
close to securing air bridges for our
grids to go on holiday to Spain or
Greece do you expect as
be able to go on holiday say by August
thank you well first of all it's worth
remembering how this situation has
arisen so as we've got the the case of
coronavirus under control noose or
further progress today on that front we
want to ensure that we don't import
cases from other countries thereby
causing the numbers to rise so we put in
place this quarantine regime now that
we've got that in place we are looking
at for example corridors whereby
particularly in countries that have a
low infection rate we could allow travel
between the United Kingdom in those
countries I know that the transport
secretary is working intensively on this
alongside the the Prime Minister and
others and I have hopeful that we will
be able to make some progress on that
but as always will be driven by the
public health in doing so so thanks for
for those questions and finally we go to
Anna Reilly from the whole Daily Mail hi
Anna hi Thank You Secretary of State's
on Monday I spoke to a mum who rushed
out to the shops as non-essential stores
were opened but she was not there to buy
anything but heartbreaking like to sell
her son's games console at cash
converters
in order to put food on the table for
the family the woman and her partner
both worked in hospitality before they
were laid off due to a lot bail and have
to go on benefits for the first time in
their lives they say it's not enough
money to live off and they don't know
how they're going to make ends meet in
the long term what would you say to that
woman and other people struggling in
Hall right now
sorry gone yep sorry just a second
question that also this week aspects we
are grieving widow she lost her 49 year
old wife to coronavirus within three
days of being admitted to hall Royal
Infirmary
she had no underlying health conditions
and died before even getting to meet her
newborn grandson her widow is now part
of a campaign group that thinks the
government delayed its response to
protect the public from catching
coronavirus and in doing so failed to
save thousands of lives that have been
and still continue to be lost to this
deadly virus
she believes like former minister a
promise age member professor Neil
Ferguson
that the number of UK deaths could have
been half that's around 20,000 lives
saved
if lockdown had come just a week earlier
now no one expects the government's
response to have been perfect in
handling a pandemic that the world's
never seen before
but please can you be honest what has
been the government's biggest mistake so
far okay well thank you Anna for those
very detailed questions that the first
thing I well first thing I would say is
my most profound sympathies to the lady
who's lost family and of course to
anyone many people I know have lost jobs
during this coronavirus this is not
something we wanted to happen but we
have had this unprecedented public
health crisis and we've had to take very
draconian measures in order to save
lives and to protect the NHS in response
to that the Chancellor has announced an
unparalleled package of measures to
support people if you take just for
example in Hull alone 31900 people in
whole have benefited from the job
retention scheme 4,000 businesses have
benefited from the local authority grant
6,000 people have benefited from the
self-employment income scheme so that's
literally tens of millions of pounds of
support but sadly we can't support
everyone that's for example why we have
increased the universal credit but in
the long run what we have to do as long
as it is safe to do so in hospitality is
an important example of this is to
reopen those sectors and we're not doing
this for some sort of ideological reason
we're doing it for precisely the reason
that you set out which is that people
need to be able to get their jobs back
and get back to work if it's safe to do
so and in respect of the the point about
when we introduced lock down at the
beginning of this crisis ministers
clearly made the decision we were
informed by scientific advice in doing
so we did so at a relatively similar
stage in the progression of the disease
as other countries did so on the point
about the numbers of people affected and
the lessons to be learned it really is
just too early to make those sort of
Harrison's different countries have
different ways of measuring it different
countries have different demographics of
course there will be a time when we need
to look at all of those lessons but I
hope that you and people watching will
appreciate our focus as a government and
as government ministers an indeed my
focus has to be on what we are doing to
continue to control and drive down the
numbers of this disease so thank you for
those those questions did you want have
a quick follow-up disk um yeah yeah you
say the times not right now will there
be an inquiry in in the future then as
to measures that could have been put in
place or lessons learned yes because yes
of course there will be lessons that
will will need to be learned but as I
say that focus still at the moment this
is with dealing with this crisis driving
the numbers down the you saw from the
presentation at the beginning of this we
are continuing to make progress with
that over time we will look at the
lessons from around the world and look
at those comparisons when it can be
meaningfully done and learn appropriate
lessons so thank you for those questions
and that concludes this afternoon's
press conference thank you very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News
you